

ACL2's meta rule and clause processor facilities are designed to allow
users of ACL2 to write custom proof routines which, once proven
correct, can be called by the ACL2 prover\footnote{Alternatively, such
  proof routines may be ``trusted''---used without proof, but at the
  cost of a ``trust tag'' marking this use as a source of
  unsoundness.}.

Such proof routines have historically been limited in their use of
ACL2's database of stored facts and its built-in prover functions.
For example, a metafunction could call the ACL2 rewriter, but when
proving this metafunction correct, the result of calling the rewriter
could not be assumed to be equivalent to the input --- that is, the
rewriter could not be assumed to be correct.  Somewhat similarly,
metafunctions and clause processors could both examine the ACL2 world
(the logical state of the prover, including the database of stored
facts), but in proving the correctness of these functions, facts
extracted from the world could not be assumed to be correct.

Meta-extract is an ACL2 feature first introduced in Version 6.0
(December, 2012).  It allows for certain facts stored in the ACL2
world and certain ACL2 prover routines to be effectively assumed
correct when proving the correctness of metafunctions and clause
processors.

Correctness proofs for metafunctions and clause processors reference a
function that we will call a \textit{pseudo-evaluator}, typically
defined via the \texttt{defevaluator} macro.  (Elsewhere in the ACL2
literature this is simply referred to as an evaluator; however, we
want to emphasize the difference between a pseudo-evaluator and a true
term evaluator.)  A pseudo-evaluator is a constrained function about
which only certain facts are known; these facts are ones that would
also be true of a ``real'' evaluator capable of fully interpreting any
ACL2 term.  It is hoped that these facts are sufficient to allow the
user to prove a metafunction or clause-processor correct as well as if
they could use a real term evaluator.  To prove a metafunction correct
the user must show that the pseudo-evaluation of the term output by
the metafunction is equal (or equivalent) to the pseudo-evaluation of
the input term.  Intuitively, if this can be proved of a
pseudo-evaluator, and the only facts known about the pseudo-evaluator
are ones that are also true of the real evaluator of ACL2 terms, then
this must also be true of the real evaluator: that is, the evaluations
of the input and output terms of the metafunction are equivalent, and
thus the metafunction is correct.

The meta-extract feature allows certain hypotheses to be assumed
during the proof of correctness of a metafunction.  These meta-extract
hypotheses are applications of the pseudo-evaluator to calls of the
functions
\texttt{meta-extract-contextual-fact} and
\texttt{meta-extract-global-fact+}.  These functions produce various
sorts of terms by extracting facts from the ACL2 world and calling
ACL2 prover subroutines, constructed so that if ACL2 and its logical
state is sound, the terms produced should always be true.  For some
examples, these functions can produce:
\begin{itemize}
\item the body of a previously proven theorem
\item the definitional equation of a previously defined function
\item a term equating a call of a function on quoted constants to the
  quoted value of that call
\item a term equating some term $a$ to the result of rewriting $a$
\item a term describing the typeset of $a$, according to ACL2's type
  reasoning.
\end{itemize}

Intuitively, adding a meta-extract hypothesis to a metafunction's
correctness theorem is allowable because we expect the (real)
evaluation of any term produced by one of the meta-extract functions
to return true.  If we prove the pseudo-evaluator theorem with a
meta-extract hypothesis and, as before, reason that since the theorem
is true of the pseudo-evaluator, it is also true of the real
evaluator, then the final step is to say that the meta-extract
hypothesis using the real evaluator is true (or else ACL2 is already
unsound).  Therefore we can still conclude that the evaluations of the
metafunction's output and input terms are equivalent.


